# What are constraints in SQL? List and explain the different types of constraints.

Constraints are the rules that we can apply on the type of data in a table. That is, we can specify the limit on the type of data that can be stored in a particular column in a table using constraints. 

**The available constraints in SQL are:**
 

* NOT NULL: This constraint tells that we cannot store a null value in a column. That is, if a column is specified as NOT NULL then we will not be able to store null in this particular column any more.
* UNIQUE: This constraint when specified with a column, tells that all the values in the column must be unique. That is, the values in any row of a column must not be repeated.
* PRIMARY KEY: A primary key is a field which can uniquely identify each row in a table. And this constraint is used to specify a field in a table as primary key.
* FOREIGN KEY: A Foreign key is a field which can uniquely identify each row in a another table. And this constraint is used to specify a field as Foreign key.
* DEFAULT: This constraint specifies a default value for the column when no value is specified by the user.

1. NOT NULL – 
If we specify a field in a table to be NOT NULL. Then the field will never accept null value. That is, you will be not allowed to insert a new row in the table without specifying any value to this field. 
For example, the below query creates a table Student with the fields ID and NAME as NOT NULL. That is, we are bound to specify values for these two fields every time we wish to insert a new row. 
 ### `Example`
 
```sql
CREATE TABLE Student
(
ID int(6) NOT NULL,
NAME varchar(10) NOT NULL,
ADDRESS varchar(20)
);
```

2. UNIQUE –
This constraint helps to uniquely identify each row in the table. i.e. for a particular column, all the rows should have unique values. We can have more than one UNIQUE columns in a table. 
For example, the below query creates a table Student where the field ID is specified as UNIQUE. i.e, no two students can have the same ID. Unique constraint in detail. 
 ### `Example`
 
```sql
CREATE TABLE Student
(
ID int(6) NOT NULL UNIQUE,
NAME varchar(10),
ADDRESS varchar(20)
);
```

3. PRIMARY KEY – 
Primary Key is a field which uniquely identifies each row in the table. If a field in a table as primary key, then the field will not be able to contain NULL values as well as all the rows should have unique values for this field. So, in other words we can say that this is combination of NOT NULL and UNIQUE constraints. 
A table can have only one field as primary key. Below query will create a table named Student and specifies the field ID as primary key. 
 ### `Example`
 
```sql
CREATE TABLE Student
(
ID int(6) NOT NULL UNIQUE,
NAME varchar(10),
ADDRESS varchar(20),
PRIMARY KEY(ID)
);
```

4. FOREIGN KEY – 
Foreign Key is a field in a table which uniquely identifies each row of a another table. That is, this field points to primary key of another table. This usually creates a kind of link between the tables. 
Consider the two tables as shown below: 
 
**Orders**

|O_ID	|ORDER_NO	|C_ID|
|-----|-----|----|
|1|	2253|	3|
|2|	3325|	3|
|3|	4521|	2|
|4|	8532|	1|
 

**Customers**

|C_ID	|NAME	|ADDRESS|
|----|----|---|
|1	|RAMESH	|DELHI|
|2	|SURESH	|NOIDA|
|3	|DHARMESH	|GURGAON|

As we can see clearly that the field C_ID in Orders table is the primary key in Customers table, i.e. it uniquely identifies each row in the Customers table. Therefore, it is a Foreign Key in Orders table. 
 ### `Example`
 
 ```sql
CREATE TABLE Orders
(
O_ID int NOT NULL,
ORDER_NO int NOT NULL,
C_ID int,
PRIMARY KEY (O_ID),
FOREIGN KEY (C_ID) REFERENCES Customers(C_ID)
);
```

5. DEFAULT – 
This constraint is used to provide a default value for the fields. That is, if at the time of entering new records in the table if the user does not specify any value for these fields then the default value will be assigned to them. 
For example, the below query will create a table named Student and specify the default value for the field AGE as 18. 
 ### `Example`
```sql
CREATE TABLE Student
(
ID int(6) NOT NULL,
NAME varchar(10) NOT NULL,
AGE int DEFAULT 18
);
```